# Data Loading

<EpicVideo url="https://www.epicweb.dev/workshops/full-stack-foundations/loading/intro-to-loading" />

## The web

When a user goes to a URL, the browser makes a request to the server. The server
then sends back a response, which is usually HTML. The browser then renders the
HTML into a page. The HTML can contain references to other resources, such as
images, CSS, and JavaScript. The browser will make requests for these resources
and process them as well.

That initial request for HTML normally comes with all the information the user
expects to see. However, users of modern web applications expect to be able to
interact with the page without reloading it. So, to keep the data that's on the
page up-to-date as the user makes changes and navigates around, the application
also needs to make requests to the server for data. Around 2006, a new
technology was developed for this purpose called AJAX. AJAX stands for
Asynchronous JavaScript and XML. It's a way of making requests to the server
without reloading the page.

These days, web applications typically use a newer web standard called
[`fetch`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Fetch_API). Among
other things, this API allows the browser to make requests to a server without
triggering a full page refresh. There are various parts to this API, but two
critical objects are called
[`Request`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Request) and
[`Response`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Response).

We can use this API to make requests to our servers to get data. Normally, a
request for data will return a JSON object which is a string that looks like a
JavaScript object. We can use the `JSON.parse` function to convert this string
into a JavaScript object, but this is so common, that the `fetch` `Response`
object has a special method (called
[`.json()`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Response/json)) to
parse the JSON response for us.

It's important to know that much of the `fetch` API is asynchronous and
[Promise](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Promise)-based,
so it will be very useful to understand promises when using the `fetch` API.

On the server side, most modern JavaScript runtime environments support the
`fetch` API out of the box.

Even though we're not requesting HTML from the server, we still make `fetch`
requests to URLs. Typically a server will have a router that is responsible for
routing these URL requests to the appropriate "handler" (or code that handles
that "resource"). The handler will then do whatever work is necessary to get the
data and return a response to the client.

When the server sends the response, it can include special "metadata" that goes
along with the response that tells the browser how to handle the response. This
is in the form of
[`Headers`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Headers). We won't
dive very deep into headers in this workshop, but they are a very important part
of the `fetch` API that you should be aware of.

## In Remix

Remix is built around the `fetch` API. In a Remix application, you work directly
with the `Request` and `Response` objects. Even if the server-side framework has
bespoke APIs for handling requests and responses, your remix adapter will
convert those to and from web standard `Request` and `Response` objects for you.

In our application, we're using the popular [`express`](https://npm.im/express)
web framework for handling our traffic and the `@remix-run/express` adapter to
convert the `express` requests and responses to and from `Request` and
`Response` objects.

Remix has built-in support for loading data for both the initial page load (the
"document" request) and for subsequent data requests (the "data" requests). One
cool part about Remix is that you typically don't need to worry about whether
the data is being loaded as a document request or a data request. Your code to
load the data will be the same, as will the code to render the UI.

The data loading is a part of the route module in Remix. Each route module in
the `app/routes` directory can export an `async` function called a
[`loader`](https://remix.run/docs/en/main/route/loader). This function is run
only on the server and therefore has access to your database, APIs, private
environment variables, etc. It receives the `Request` object and `params` object
and should return a `Response` object. For example:

```tsx
import { type LoaderFunctionArgs } from '@remix-run/node'

export async function loader({ request, params }: LoaderFunctionArgs) {
	const dataString = JSON.stringify({ hello: 'world' })
	return new Response(dataString, {
		headers: { 'content-type': 'application/json' },
	})
}
```

Because the most common use case for loaders is returning JSON data, Remix also
exports a utility called `json` which allows you to more easily create a JSON
object:

```tsx
import { json, type LoaderFunctionArgs } from '@remix-run/node'

export async function loader({ request, params }: LoaderFunctionArgs) {
	return json({ hello: 'world' })
}
```

Then the UI code can use the
[`useLoaderData`](https://remix.run/docs/en/main/hooks/use-loader-data) hook
from `@remix-run/react` which will return the data from the `loader` function.

```tsx
import { json, type LoaderFunctionArgs } from '@remix-run/node'
import { useLoaderData } from '@remix-run/react'

export async function loader({ request, params }: LoaderFunctionArgs) {
	return json({ hello: 'world' })
}

export default function MyRoute() {
	const data = useLoaderData<typeof loader>()
	return (
		<div>
			<h1>{data.hello}</h1>
		</div>
	)
}
```

Finally, you can control the `headers` with remix's `json` utility by passing a
second argument to `json` which allows you to set things like cache headers for
example. And of course, if you want full control you can always create the
response object yourself instead of using the utility. Remix exposes the full
web platform to you.
